---
layout: post
title:  looking for needles in the haystack
date: 2021-04-02 09:56:00-0400
description: a new anomaly detection method for LSST
categories: research
tags: astronomy, research
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
related_publications: villar2021deep, villar2020anomaly
---

In this post I will summarize the work presented at [NeurIPS](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11194) (for ML-people) and submitted to [AAS Journals](https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.12102) (for astro-people). We present a new algorithm to search for anomalous events in live LSST supernova-like time series. 

Why do we care about looking for "weirdos" with the Vera C. Rubin Observatory? LSST will observe roughly one million extragalactic transients *annually*; however, our spectroscopic and multiwavelength resrouces are in short supply! Realistically, we will only be able to conduct in-depth, active studies on 1 in 10,000 events discovered by the Rubin Observatory! We need to view each event with a critical eye, and be open to the possiblity of discovering new astrophysics. With this in mind, we developed this algorithm to search for interesting looking transients without any explicit knowledge of the undelrying physics.

For this work, we use the (incredible!) [PLAsTiCC](https://plasticc.org/) dataset, which is a massive simulation of galactic and extragalactic transients as they would appear in the Vera C. Rubin Observatory datastream. The simulation aims to capture the transient populations as they would appear in in 3 years of LSST data -- meaning that some transients will be much more rare than others. Furthmore, the simulation is completely tagged with the physics used to generate every single event. We use this dataset to label majority (normal looking SNe) and minority classes, but we do not use these labels to build out algorithm.

The algorithm is summarized in the figure below. In short: we figure out a data-driven model for a generic supernova; we fit all the supernovae to this model; finally, we look for weirdos based on the model parameters. The specific "model" is a variational recurrent autoencoder, an increasingly popular deep probabalistic model. The autoencoder learns a representation of the light curves by summarizing them into a small (size 10) vector. We don't need to tell the autoencoder what type of supernova is being encoded -- it learns a generic model for all the SNe.

FIGURE

Then, we pass each of these encoding vectors through an *isolation forest*. This technique works by attempting to isolate each event through a series of binary tree decisions. The idea is that if an event is easily isolated from the others, it is probably an anomaly. Each event received an "anomaly score", inverses related to how many decision trees it takes to isolate the event. We also estimate the uncertainty on this score by simulating several instances of the light curves, varying flux and redshift, and running it through the same isolation forest. It is especially important to note that we are able to assign an anomaly score which actively updates as the light curve is observed!

After running every light curve through the isolation forest, we ....

{% if page.comments %}
<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>

/**
*  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
*  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables*/
/*
var disqus_config = function () {
this.page.url = PAGE_URL;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
this.page.identifier = PAGE_IDENTIFIER; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
};
*/
(function() { // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
s.src = 'https://ashleyvillar-com.disqus.com/embed.js';
s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
(d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
})();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
{% endif %}

